hey everyone losland montgomery here
welcome back
first chp episode of 2021.
we're gonna try and finish up this
little general survey of the history of
the thai
chinese it's been a few episodes and i
haven't begged you in a while but if
you'd like to subscribe to my patreon
and keep this
long running family program going
another couple weeks
patreon.com china history podcast that's
patreon.com
history podcast slash not backslash
thanks for that lou we left off last
time with the government of thailand
after the name change from siam in 1939
with the pedal to the metal with the
promotion of thai nationalism
and if the ethnic chinese minority
didn't exhibit enough enthusiasm for the
whole idea
well they were considered unpatriotic
and all the baggage that
uh went with that accusation sounds
familiar in our day
and during the 1930s as we saw last
episode in part six
the leadership inside the thai
government led by plek fibonzongkram
and well i didn't mention them last time
but praya pahun
was no less a player in 1930s 40s
politics than fibon and
was totally in on the whole lineup on
japan's side idea
they and their people's party they knew
how to play to the home crowd and many
of thailand's ethnic chinese
had to go through some hard times
and leaders in the chinese community who
spoke out against japan or did
community organizing to resist the
japanese and their efforts to
subjugate china well they were silenced
using all the well-worn ways of
intimidation
including as i mentioned last episode
assassination
an extreme form of coercion if there
ever was one
and the government ended up being quite
effective in tamping down on chinese
efforts to carry out anti-japanese
demonstrations of civil disobedience
on the streets of bangkok and elsewhere
during these
early years of this shotgun marriage
between the empire of japan
and the kingdom of thailand now when i
say chinese efforts against the japanese
let me also mention
not all thai chinese lined up on the
same side of the resistance
they were never one single monolithic
community who all subscribed to the same
politics and had the same
outlook on the affairs going down there
was a sizable number of people who said
why resist japan they were the ones who
were standing up to the european
colonialists and
sending them packing they were the good
guys those in the thai chinese community
who also felt this way
joined hands with members of the new
thai bureaucratic elite who even with
their
chinese family background completely
identified as thai
and fully embraced fibun's vision of
thai nationalism and then there were
those who said
japan's killing chinese and trying to
colonize parts of china
and asia and besides all that why do
they deserve our support
why should we look the other way at
what's being done
to exacerbate the already precarious
situation
thiburn's government had carried out a
series of
nationalizations of industries that had
up to that point
been left in the hands of chinese
merchants and industrialists
if there was a lucrative and high volume
industry and it was presently controlled
by chinese
the government took over first was
liquor 1936
then in 1939 rice trading and milling
was nationalized
even individual ethnic chinese street
vendors were not safe and ended up
getting chased out of business
and replaced by local ties it went that
deep
with all this harassment of the ethnic
chinese ties
enough signals have been sent to japan
by the thai government to insure them
they could be counted on as their
friends and that
when it came to their chinese residents
they knew how to handle them
don't forget when japan bombed pearl
harbor on december 7
1941 they also hit the philippines guam
wake island malaya singapore and hong
kong
and part of the plan also involved
thailand
after putting up some token resistance
to the invading japanese
fibun and his government rolled out the
red carpet
a treaty of alliance was eventually
signed which
among other things involved joint
military cooperation between
thai and japanese forces in fighting the
british and chinese forces next door in
burma
in january 1942 fibon declared war on
britain
and the united states as far as the
position taken by the usg the way they
viewed thailand
in the hands of the japanese the country
was just another manchukuo
and fibon praia pahoon and everyone who
lined up with them were simply puppets
of the japanese
back then in the heady opening months of
world war
ii it was quite easy to believe the
notion of japan's invincibility
when fibon was looking for some hefty
dividends
for throwing his country's lot in with
team japan he fully embraced the whole
idea of japan's
greater asian co-prosperity sphere and
his expectations were quite high as far
as you know what he wanted out of the
whole thing for his country
one thing he definitely still had his
eye on was the recovery of the states
that had been
snatched away by the british down in
malaya and the french and indochina
those thai chinese who could despite the
prohibition and consequences
put up as much resistance as possible
but
in the end with the japanese and thai
military boots on their necks
there was little they can do and many
community leaders
had to ask their constituents to hold
their noses
and adapt to the new realities at least
for now
and over in china fibon reached out to
wong jingwei's collaboration
as government this was a rival faction
to the kmt
that was led by jiang kai shek and fibun
sent strong appeals to chiang
to give it all up and just join hands
with the japanese and wong ching way
and that despite what he thought of them
japan was good for china
and good for asia another
controversial act from this time was the
conscription of
thai chinese laborers and the building
of the
thai burma railway the death railway one
of the most
horrible chapters from the big thick
book of world war
ii and humanity this was the railway
that was made famous in the west by the
david lean film the bridge on the river
kwai
it was meant to be a supply route to aid
the japanese in their burma campaign
it comprised part of the route linking
bangkok and rangoon
anywhere from 180 000 to a quarter
million allied prisoners of war
built this stretch of railway between
banpong and thailand and
sanchusion in southern burma
if you remember the russian roulette
scene from deer hunter with dinero and
christopher walken that was also filmed
in this general location
the japanese leaned hard on the thai
government to press gang as many chinese
laborers as possible to get this done
not local thai workers they had to be
chinese thai
the japanese gave fibon a quota and
demanded
quite belligerently to get it filled or
else
and the government gave this thankless
task to the chinese chamber of commerce
and told them to go rustle up the
necessary numbers
how many chinese died along with the
allied prisoners
yeah all we could do is guess this
railway
ran through what was then some of the
most inhospitable parts of thailand
was a feat of pure engineering genius
but the suffering that was endured and
the loss of
life made this death railway
one of the darker chapters of world war
ii history not to mention in
thai chinese history in the beginning
fibon really went out of his way to be a
good friend of the japanese
he wanted something in return he thought
by suppressing chinese anti-japanese
sentiment and
cozying up to the probable winners in
this conflict
he'd be able to expand thailand's
borders out a bit
and get in good with japan and reap the
benefits of having
bet on the right horse and when phi
boone started to get a little too over
confident about the esteem the japanese
authorities held him in
and began to act on his own making moves
in those lost territories
prematurely well he was rebuffed by his
japanese bosses and they told him to
stand down
this and other things going on allowed
fibon
in time to realize his big plans to
ride japan's coattails to the big time
it wasn't going to happen in japan's
overbearing behavior in thailand the
obscene profits they were making in the
economy the unabashed
one-sidedness of the relationship and
everything they demanded cooperation on
the disrespect they heaped on the local
thai nationals
interfering in thai domestic and
political affairs
all of these factors combined
finally got to feebun and before long
this love affair began to hit the skids
mid-1943
well japan wasn't finished but things
were looking a far
cry from 1941 and fibon began to realize
the payoff he was looking for
wasn't looking promising and it began to
push back in some ways
foot dragging not taking certain demands
seriously
and the ones running the show in bangkok
on behalf of japan
well they picked up on this sooner or
later and in no uncertain terms
let fibo know they didn't take kindly to
this kind of thing and
after many threats were implied the two
sides made nice and
japan even handed fibon the malay states
he wanted back for so long
by end 1943 well there was definitely
blood in the water and the allied powers
knew this
and so did fibon handing over the five
malay states was
well by this time an empty gesture
because japan was giving away something
that probably wasn't going to be theirs
much longer
and fibun finally came to the conclusion
that
if there was ever a time to start
furiously backpedaling and distancing
himself from the empire of japan
now was it the time had come to start
planning for the future
and this meant reaching out to chiang
kai-shek and the nationalist government
in china
he even tried to contact the communists
but they wouldn't have anything to do
with them
and out of nowhere in august 1944
fibon fell from grace the thai national
assembly
pulled the curtain down on febun and
just like that
he was out removed as prime minister and
as the commander-in-chief of the army
and later on plec fibon songkram
will be tried as a war criminal for
collaborating with the enemy
but he gets off the hook and doesn't
stay on the sidelines for too long
makes a comeback in 1947. we'll get to
that
and by 1944 and certainly in the 1945
the japanese presence in thailand was
shaken quite badly and all the local
ethnic chinese resistance groups large
and small
made life miserable for the japanese and
not only were they
tripped up at every opportunity all
those who were perceived as
collaborators got hit too
there was a brutal payback period that
saw a lot of retribution meted out to
members of the
thai chinese community the chinese
chamber of commerce
the one organization tasked with being
the interlocutor between the chinese
community and the japanese and fibun's
government
they too fell under a high degree of
criticism for the way they were
perceived as collaborators
even though they like so many others
just
tried to save their own skins in the
face of japanese threats
well we all know what happened japan
lost the war
then there was the chinese civil war
that concluded in october 1949 with the
founding of the people's republic
the british had returned to their former
colonies and the malay states that
weren't japan's to give
had to be handed over to britain the
french went right back to ruling
indochina
and over in thailand it was a new day
for one formal diplomatic relations were
established with china
still the republic of china at this time
fibon
was a bona fide war criminal according
to both the court of public opinion and
the victorious allies
thibun had no trouble meeting that
threshold and when they were going
around
extracting pounds of flesh from the
losers and from japan's helpers during
the war
fibon was in their crosshairs
the thai government had a whole hell of
a lot of mansplaining to do for the
choices they made
in the end the post-war thai government
they had to hand over a few gimmies to
the allies
to the brits they wanted some of that
thai rice down in malaya
even the russians demanded the thai
government stop clamping down so hard
on the communists who were doing their
mischief on the streets of bangkok
and in 1946 thailand went back to being
siam again
officially and the new prime minister
former u.s ambassador seni promotes
who refused to line up behind fibon
about the whole declaring war in the
united states thing
well he ended up serving as prime
minister three times never for long
he couldn't have been more cooperative
with the allies and especially to the
americans
and he did his best to distance himself
from the fibon wartime administration
as for the thai chinese with fibon out
of the way and with
japan defeated they had a heck of a
comeback in siam
and elsewhere chinese newspapers were
back on the newsstands again
and chinese language schools back in
business
as stakeholders in this victory over
japan
china gained no small amount of prestige
but with civil war breaking out
following all that had happened since
it led to yet another eruption of
emigration
with 86 000 chinese making their way to
siam
in just 1946 alone
that set off alarm bells in the kingdom
the following year
well they didn't pass an exclusion act
or anything but a quota was put on the
number of chinese
allowed to immigrate to siam it was
initially set at 10
000 per year and the resurgence of
chinese nationalism exhibited on the
streets was
really freaking out a lot of people then
in march 1948 some chinese schools
refused to fly the siamese flag and a
lot of
political hay was made of that and the
schools were all closed down
and then a month later a bunch of fibons
military bodies
overthrew the government in a coup and
this cleared the way for the return of
plek
fibon songkran pushing back on siam's
chinese was
practically fibun's middle name a lot of
chinese nationalistic activities were
suppressed and once again after a brief
moment of rejuvenation
siam's chinese had to lay low and for
good measure
fibun had the quota of chinese
immigrants to siam
cut from ten thousand to a couple
hundred
and once again siam was renamed thailand
and nationalism fibon style was all the
rage
he stands out in modern thai history is
truly
the face of anti-chinese sentiment and
that
great kingdom and then in october 1949
now the communists emerged victorious on
the chinese mainland
and all across nanyang from the
philippines to burma
and all points in between overseas
chinese who had assets in china
property factories and businesses on the
mainland
they lost everything the gateways to
china
were all slammed shut to those who well
in the past came and went as they
pleased
so right away you can imagine the crimp
this put on immigration to siam
and everywhere else and the siamese
government didn't skip a beaten
condemning suspected chinese
sympathizers
deporting some there was there was a
paranoia that set in
and talk of the so-called kintakalumna
or fifth column
that saw mao zedong clandestinely
directing and organizing his chinese
minions on the streets of bangkok and
elsewhere in the country
to overthrow the established order and
drag the nation down the communist road
and not just in siam this dreaded notion
of a fifth column had
roots that were spreading all across the
countries of nanyang
some thai chinese with their patriotism
burning hot and with their ungovernable
optimism and the new china
went back and became part of the 1950s
china dream
and later on it probably got plowed
under by one of mao's famous campaigns
policies that penalized chinese for not
assimilating fast enough were put in
place
and enforced chinese names had to be
replaced with thai names and
determined to hit the chinese where it
hurt most new regulations were put in
place that upset the established
business norms
between the nationalizing of industries
and favoring local ties over chinese
the government made a mess of things
that wasn't as bad as robert mugabe and
zimbabwe but it got bad enough whereby
the chinese of bangkok were
cordially invited back to uh mop up and
set things straight again and both the
prc and
roc leaders wagged their fingers at
fibon about these
anti-chinese measures he was pushing
through
but as one door shut another door opened
and the chinese were rushed in
this was in the world of international
finance banking
insurance and other financial services
well this is nothing new but the scale
and that sophistication was something
the east india companies of the past
probably wouldn't have recognized many
of the biggest banks today
opened at this time including bangkok
bank
today over 3 trillion baht in assets and
as far as how uncle sam viewed the state
of affairs
well fibona may have been a japanese
collaborator
but now he was our collaborator and the
truman
and eisenhower administrations got on
famously with him
there were educational and cultural
exchanges and
good old-fashioned military aid and arms
sales to boot
thailand even backed us in the korean
war supplying the u.s
side with some of that famous rice of
theirs
and not to skip ahead so quickly but at
the historic 1955 bandung conference
one of joe enlise magic moments on the
world stage
well one of the things he said was if a
chinese was born or resides permanently
overseas
i'm paraphrasing they are nationals of
that country
and the prc dropped their official
policy that maintained
any one of chinese dissent were prc
nationals
the fear of the secret chinese communist
fifth column
never really went away not in thailand
nor elsewhere in southeast asia
all across southeast asia many segments
of society were living large in this
post-war boom years in the 1950s
the u.s government was generous with the
cold war dividends
you know as long as you did what they
asked and despite cuddling with uncle
sam and
being our guy in bangkok and all
phoeben's government
still kept a back channel open with the
prc
of course we did the same thing those
familiar with thai politics over the
past few decades will not be surprised
to know
that after a few failed attempts to get
rid of them
finally in 1957
fibon was overthrown he ended up
skedaddling to japan where he was
granted asylum and died there seven
years later in 1964.
same year hard day's night came out and
after booting him out and replacing
plaque phoeben's own crime with sarit
tanarat
another military strong man it had been
a rough 1950s for thai politics
and money does that and there was a lot
of it sloshing around
sarit tanarat kept up fibon's
anti-communist stance and stuck close to
captain america
and was one of our point men in the cold
war this was the
time of mccarthyism red china and the
soviets
things were at a major froth and for the
thai chinese who had done so much for
the economy
going back to the sukhothai and ayutia
kingdom days
they once again rose to the occasion
and thanks to an entrepreneurial spirit
that never disappointed
coupled with the loss of the chinese
market as a destination to invest their
formidable troves of capital a lot of
this money
stayed at home and fibons passed
policies of nationalization and putting
stumbling blocks in the way of thai
chinese companies
well these these monopolies gave way for
more efficient
publicly traded and private business
operations that
grew into multinational operations and
today are among the biggest
regional conglomerates in 1972
after nixon paid his visit to china and
broke the ice
first malaysia in 1974 established
formal relations then the philippines
and then in 1975
thai prime minister kukri promotes
visited the prc
and formal diplomatic relations were
established
with the corollary to that being
relations with the government on taiwan
were severed and into the 80s
90s and now in our day the great
thai chinese tycoons including the most
famous and renowned of them all tane
chernowon
shia guamin founder of the cp group
they are today as they had always been
going back to
toxin the great the locomotives who
transformed their country's economy into
one of the five
asian tiger cubs along with indonesia
malaysia
philippines and vietnam these so-called
tiger cub economies of course were the
smaller versions of the four asian tiger
economies of
hong kong singapore south korea and
taiwan
together these nine economies and the
broader southeast asian economies
well actually i guess you could say
going all the way back to qing dynasty
times
comprised a so-called bamboo network
or zhuwong that has come to completely
dominate the region's trade
investment construction and finance and
as we saw over the past seven
episodes this network had centuries to
grow
interconnect and become so strong and
resilient no world war or
cataclysm could ever shake it and the
biggest
companies and family fortunes in the
kingdom of thailand today
are led by people whose ancestry like so
many across southeast asia
can be traced back to china and as we
kept hearing over and over
practically ad nauseam always
they all came from two provinces
fujian and guangdong including hainan
which
since 1988 has been its own
administrative entity and not
part of guangdong every nation whose
borders touch
the south china sea they all have their
renowned and celebrated ethnic chinese
billionaires who did so much to
contribute to the country's prosperity
and political standing in the region
and in thailand today besides the cherno
won on family
there's tiang chi ratiwat of the central
group
chelyu uvidia of red bull fame
saroon c ratanapakti whose business
empire comprises thai beverage
tcc group and fraser and neve and the
late wechai sriwatan apropa
of the duty-free king power group yeah
football fans will remember him
as the owner of the leicester city
football club who
died so tragically in a helicopter crash
in october 2018
these are some of the headliners but
like it is in most places
it was the combined brains brawn
and industry of the rank and file ethnic
thai chinese whose names and
fortunes don't even come close to these
billionaire tycoons
these family patriarchs and matriarchs
too
and their progeny quietly and without
fanfare
comprised the bricks and mortar that
acted as the foundation
and building structure which provided
the economics that allowed
thailand to become this financial and
investment powerhouse in asia
you know over these past seven episodes
as you've noticed i haven't mentioned
too many names and
individual stories a lot of the time i
felt
if i mentioned one i had to mention a
hundred history is made by people and
when i introduce the chinese people and
their
place in thai history and society
well i hope you don't mind all the
generalizing i did along the way
once you zoom in and look at some of
these people
only then does a lot of what i've been
trying to introduce spring to life
one of the main sources i used
throughout this series
was jeffrey singh and pimper5 bisol
putras
a history of the thai chinese i've had
links to that book on my website
at the accompanying pages to this
podcast series
that book came out in 2015 it's
loaded with many many stories about the
thai chinese from across
all five of the main linguistic groups
the chinese and thai words used
throughout the series
if you refer to the webpage at
tcup.media
they are all meticulously prepared for
you by none other than
your humble narrator personally pinyin
chinese characters
thai and english thai chinese history
and it's still in the process of being
written the people and events being
inscribed into their history continue on
with the tradition that goes back
centuries and from hayutia kingdom times
and clear through the chakri dynasty
into our day
the ethnic chinese of thailand well
sometimes they had to keep their heads
down and not make waves
depending on the direction of the winds
fanned by
local politics and sudden changes to the
established order
and also as we saw thailand's ethnic
chinese also had to deal with the
occasional reverberations for many
shock waves emanating from china i think
i emphasized it enough times now among
all the overseas chinese who have made
their homes and all these
lands that border the south china sea
the nan yang
even going back to before the qing
dynasty thailand was
always a special case so many ended up
there
and so many of the original inhabitants
of thailand even before the sukhothai
kingdom
1238-1438 these original peoples
were migrants from southwest china thai
people
who spoke various thai dialects that's
thai tai
so in the case of thailand a beautiful
place i've been to many times
and hope to retire to in the not too
distant future
as far as the chinese are concerned and
what percent of the population do they
really make up
where does it begin and where does it
end the commercial aspect of the
thai chinese heritage is perhaps
overemphasized
the thai chinese dominance of commerce
and industry there was
so conspicuous but the thai chinese were
more than
businessmen and no small amount of
contributions were made by them
in science education culture
politics government the military and
all throughout society a society that
well because of its buddhist tradition
knows a thing or two about helping
others
although i didn't drill down that deep
there are those stories too
and so much other little-known history
so i hope you didn't mind if we sort of
rush to the finish after
world war ii i only meant to take this
up to the start of uh
the reign of king rama the ninth his
majesty the late
king bhumibol now for the next episode i
was going to
include this subtopic somewhere inside
this series but then i got too far ahead
of myself and then it was too late
i just wanted to give a nice little
general survey of the peronica and
chinese of phuket
but rather than that i had the sudden
inspiration to just make that
a stand-alone future episode maybe
written after i moved there
or wherever i end up in thailand so next
episode we're on to something new
and exciting already got it all planned
out okay i'm out of here
don't forget to mark your calendars
chinese new year of the ox
coming up on february 12th lincoln's
birthday
yeah my father's too may he rest in
peace
okay let's try and make it a date again
next time this is laszlo montgomery
signing off for the first time in 2021
from los angeles california covet
central baby
boy is it ever the time to make
california great again
take care everyone and do try and carve
out a half hour of your time in two
weeks for another
exciting episode of the china history
podcast